DESIGN NOTES FOR A CUSTOM CUMMINS GENERATOR CONTROLLER


Which generators and transfer switches I'm using
------------------------------------------------

I built two of these controllers for two locations with different equipment from 
Cummins. In all cases, note that the ATS ("automatic transfer switch") design 
only allows it to switch to a supply (utility or generator) that has power. 

(1) RS22 22 kW generator and the RA100A transfer switch 

In this case the generator is smart; it controls an engine cooldown period and 
maintains its own exercise schedule. It responds to a "start generator" command 
and provides a "generator ready" status. 

The switch is dumb and only reacts to an "activate switch" input. It supplies 
contact closures to indicate which way the switch is positioned, and whether the 
utility power is present. We install only voltage and current sensors in the 
switch, plus a bunch of wires. 

(2) RS30000 30 kW generator and the RSS100 transfer switch "with controller" 

In this case the generator is primitive; it obeys a "start generator" command 
and does nothing else. No exercise periods, no engine cooldown, no "generator 
ready" status. 

The switch, on the other hand, is smart, with a microprocessor and some lights 
and buttons. Their processor chooses the switch position, starts the generator, 
enforces a cooldown period, and can establish an exercise schedule. We take over 
the "generator start" line, but otherwise let the switch processor do its 
thing. Our "connect to generator" relay output is not used. In addition to 
voltage and current sensors, we install relays that provide contact closures so 
we know whether utility and/or generator power is present. 

When power fails, the ATS waits for generator power to be present before 
activating the switch. Since we might delay starting the generator, it will 
follow that delay. When we "rest" the generator, it leaves the switch alone as 
long as utility power isn't present. The result is that our normal 
"wait-run-rest-run" cycle works fine. 

When utility power returns, it waits for TDEN ("time delay emergency to 
normal"), which defaults to 10 minutes, before switching back to utility power. 
Our "utility return delay" should therefore be at least that long so we don't 
turn off the generator prematurely. See the Cummins "RSS100 and RSS200 Transfer
Switch Service Manual" for instructions on setting TDEN to 5 minutes instead.

We have taken over the "generator start" control line, so we need to implement 
both an exercise schedule and an engine cooldown time, because their controller 
can no longer do those. 

In a future version of the controller we could add a third relay so that we can 
separately control "connect to utility" and "connect to generator"; then we are 
not dependent on the TDEN 10 minute delay to connect to the utility. That would
require that we connect those control lines to us instead of their processor.
It may not be worth it.

Changes we make inside the ATS (automatic transfer switch) include:
-------------------------------------------------------------------

 - connect our control/status and sense wire harnesses to various points
   inside the switch
 - add a toggle switch that powers down our controller and returns to 
   the normal factory mode of operation
 - add two ferrite transducers around the house power cables that 
   measure current draw of the load
 - add two transducers that measure the generator and utility voltage
 - for the RSS version, add two 240 VAC relays to indicate whether 
   utility and/or generator power is present
 
Design of the controller board
------------------------------

On one side of the PC board there are 7 pushbutton switches, a 20x4 LCD display, 
and 6 LED indicators. It mounts directly to the front panel of the metal 
enclosure using the switch nuts. The panel has holes for the switches and LEDs, 
and a rectangular cutout for the LCD display. 

The other side of the board contains all the other components including the two 
harness connectors to the transfer switch, and the Wifi antenna connection on 
the Airlift Wifi board. Many of the components are surface-mount, but I chose 
largish versions (1/4 watt resistors instead of 1/8 watt, for example) so that 
it's relatively easy to hand solder. 

The Airlift board is a special version of the Adafruit product I built which 
uses the ESP32 version that has a U.FL connector for an external antenna. 

Electrical noise mitigation
---------------------------

Being located adjacent to a box where 100+ amps of power is switched in 
milliseconds causes all sorts of wired and wireless RFI electrical noise 
that can disrupt the electronics of our controller. Here are the steps 
I took to mitigate that problem: 

- a metal enclosure for the circuit board
- an MOV transient voltage suppressor on the power input
- a large low-pass inductor and big filtering caps on the power input
- a diode array transient voltage suppressor on signals from outside the box
- optical isolation for digital input signals
- ground plane pours on both side of the PC board
- transparent conductive film over the cutout for the LCD display
- a deadman watchdog timer that resets the processor if it becomes catatonic
- code that resets the LCD display whenever the power is switched

That seems to have fixed the problem, but I have no idea which items were 
most important and how much margin there is.

Len Shustek
December 2019

